---
title: "[EPI] 4.4 Integer with same weight"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - programming-interviews
tags:
  - EPI 
---

> Integer with same weight - Elements of Programming Interviews (EPI) 

<!--more-->

## **Problem**: 
Let the *weight* of a nonnegative integer $x$ be the number of bits set to 1 in its binary representation. Write a program which takes a nonnegative integer $x$ as input and returns a number $y$ which has the same *weight* as $x$ such that their difference $|y-x|$ is as small as possible. assume x will not be all `0s` or all `1s` in binary. 

## **Solution**:
A simple naive brute force solution would be to start from the neighbors of $$x$$: check $$x-1$$, $$x+1$$ see if their weights are the same as $$x$$ and keep going farther out $$x-2$$, $$x+2$$ and so on until we find a match.

If we think about it a little bit, we would start to look for the solution from the **LSB** and maybe try swapping it around with other bits. The thing to notice is that when swapping bits, the closest numbers we can form will be the result of swapping 2 neighboring bits. We can see this after some math or experimentation. If we choose 2 random bits to swap, $$k_1$$ and $$k_2$$. let $$k_1 > k_2$$ so the resulting difference is going to be $$2^{k_1}-2^{k_2}$$ to minimize this we would want $$k_1$$ as small as possible and $$k_2$$ as close to $$k_1$$ as possible which would make them neighbors i.e $$k_2 = k_1 -1$$. For this we would need to find 2 distinct neighboring bits such that $$k_1$$ is minimized. So we can loop over all the bits from the right and swap the 2 rightmost consecutive bits that differ. This is the textbook's solution with loop:

```python
def closest_int_same_bit_count(x):
    NUM_UNSIGNED_BITS = 64
    for i in range(NUM_UNSIGNED_BITS - 1):
        if (x >> i) & 1 != (x >> (i + 1)) & 1:
            x ^= (1 << i) | (1 << (i + 1))  # swap bits
            return x
```

This is our solution without loops. We work with the lowest bit 0 and the lowest bit 1. We divide our problem into 3 cases which we check in order:
  1. The lowest 0 bit has a 1 neighbor to its right in which case we swap. `1101001100001111` 
  2. The lowest 0 bit has no 1 neighbor to its right but does have a 1 neighbor to its left in which case we swap. `1111000000000010`
  3. The lowest 0 bit has no 1 neighbor in which case we simply extract the lowest 1 bit and swap it with the bit to its right. Since this case is only possible if we have trailing 0s in the binary representation like `1011100100000000`.

This solution is in constant time and space and happens to answer the **variant** in the textbook too.

```python
def closest_int_same_bit_count(x: int) -> int:
    """Function takes in 64-bit int and returns
    the closest int with the same weight (number
    of set bits)"""
    inverter = (1 << 64) - 1
    xi = x ^ inverter
    lsb_0 = xi & ~(xi - 1)  # least significant 0 in x.
    # if right of lsb_0 is swappable then swap (i.e shift 0 down)
    if lsb_0 >> 1 & x:
        return x ^ ((lsb_0 >> 1) | lsb_0)
    # if left of lsb_0 is swappable then swap (i.e shift 0 up)
    elif lsb_0 << 1 & x:
        return x ^ ((lsb_0 << 1) | lsb_0)
    # lowest 0 has no 1 as neighbor. swap lsb_1 to right.
    else:
        lsb_1 = x & ~(x - 1)
        return x ^ ((lsb_1 >> 1) | lsb_1)
```

