---
title: "[TIL] 26-Jan-2020"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - today-i-learned
tags:
  - til 
---
>Linear Programming, LibreElec MP2, Better Vocals, Baking, Pandas fillna(), geotiff
<!--more-->

Linear Programming is the study of optimization problems which can be expressed as linear functions along with some linear equations/inequalities as constraints.
 - There is this simplex algorithm which can be easily understood if you consider a linear programming problem with 2 variables and look at it geometrically, we can see that the optimal value is going to be at the vertex of the region that contains all **feasible solutions**. This region is called the simplex. CLRS has a very good and simple explanation of this in ch 29.

Kodi/LibreElec has a problem where it can't play old ripped dvd vobs since they are mpeg2 if you have VAAPI (video acceleration) turned on. Disabling seems to have fixed the problem with strange grey+green artifacts where the image looked like some strange pseudo 3d 2 channel thing.

Also, adding a small speaker on top of your centre channel speaker with the same spliced inputs from the centre channel makes vocals sounds better... I guess this means that most vocals are sent through the centre channel. 

You bake muffins/cakes at 180c for 15-20 minutes apparently.

You can get rid of all null values from your pandas dataframe with this fillna thing but strangely it didnt do anything if I used it on a column result? like `df["column"].fillna(0, inplace=True)` did absolutely nothing... maybe i shouldve done it like `df.fillna(0,inplace=True,columns="column")` or something but anyway this works:

```python
df.fillna(0, inplace=True)
```

geotiff is an image format used to encode geographical data, dont know anymore about it just came across it when trying to work with the facebook/worldpop datasets.
